context.md, before:

# Overview

this is a neovim plugin for agentic tool use
the entrypoint is in `lua/magenta/init.lua`. When the plugin starts up, it will kick off the `node/magenta.ts` node process. That will reach back out and establish the bridge, which will grab the options from lua and establish bidirectional communication between the two halves of the plugin.

options are configured in `lua/magenta/options.lua`
neovim keymaps are configured in `lua/magenta/keymaps.lua`
`node/sidebar.ts` manages the sidebar. This is where we create the chat and input buffers, and initialize keymaps on them.

# Architecture

The core architectural components include:

- `Controllers` - Classes that manage specific parts of the application. Each controller maintains its own state and handles messages that are relevant to it.
- `Msg/RootMsg` - Messages that trigger state changes. There's a root message type that is then directed to specific controllers.
- `dispatch/myDispatch` - Functions passed to controllers that allows them to send messages through the system. Each controller receives a root dispatcher that it can use to communicate with other parts of the system.
- `view` - A function that renders the current controller state in TUI. This is done in a declarative way using the `d` template literal. You can attach bindings to different parts of the text via `withBindings`.

The general flow is:

- Controllers initialize with their own state and receive a root dispatcher.
- When a user action occurs, it triggers a command or binding that dispatches a message.
- The message flows to the appropriate controller via the root dispatcher.
- The controller updates its internal state and may dispatch additional messages to other controllers.
- The view is rendered based on the updated state.

One key principle: **If you create a class, you're responsible for passing actions or messages to that class.**

The main architectural files are:

- [root-msg.ts](https://github.com/dlants/magenta.nvim/blob/main/node/root-msg.ts) - Defines the root message type that flows through the system
- [magenta.ts](https://github.com/dlants/magenta.nvim/blob/main/node/magenta.ts#L21) - Contains the central dispatching loop in the `dispatch` method of the Magenta class
- [tea/tea.ts](https://github.com/dlants/magenta.nvim/blob/main/node/tea/tea.ts) - Manages the rendering cycle
- [view.ts](https://github.com/dlants/magenta.nvim/blob/main/node/tea/view.ts) - Implements the VDOM-like declarative rendering template

# View System

For comprehensive view system documentation and templating patterns, use `get_file` to access the `doc-views` skill at `.claude/skills/doc-views/skill.md`.

**Important**: This is NOT React - it's a TUI templating system for neovim buffers.

# Putting it all together

Here's a minimal example of a controller with just one message type and two states:

```typescript
// make sure to grab appropriate imports relative to the file path

// Define a simple message type for toggling
export type Msg = { type: "toggle" } | { type: "request-finished" };

// this should be imported from node/root-msg.ts
export type ToggleRootMsg = {
  type: "toggle-msg";
  id: ToggleId;
  msg: Msg;
};

export type ToggleId = number & { __toggleId: true };

export class Toggle {
  public state: {
    isOn: boolean;
  };

  private myDispatch: Dispatch<Msg>;

  constructor(
    public id: ToggleId,
    private context: { dispatch: Dispatch<RootMsg>; nvim: Nvim },
  ) {
    this.myDispatch = (msg) =>
      this.context.dispatch({
        type: "toggle-msg",
        id: this.id,
        msg,
      });

    this.state = {
      isOn: false,
    };
  }

  update(msg: RootMsg): void {
    if (msg.type === "toggle-msg" && msg.id === this.id) {
      this.myUpdate(msg.msg);
    }
  }

  private myUpdate(msg: Msg): void {
    switch (msg.type) {
      case "toggle":
        this.state.isOn = !this.state.isOn;

        if (this.state.isOn) {
          this.notifyServer().catch((error) => {
            this.context.nvim.logger.error("Failed to notify server:", error);
          });
        }
        return;
      case "request-finished":
        this.context.nvim.logger.info("Server notification completed");
        return;
      default:
        assertUnreachable(msg);
    }
  }

  private async notifyServer(): Promise<void> {
    await new Promise<void>((resolve) => {
      setTimeout(() => resolve(), 500);
    });
    // Dispatch the request-finished message when done
    this.myDispatch({ type: "request-finished" });
  }

  view() {
    return d`
Current state: ${this.state.isOn ? "ON" : "OFF"}

${withBindings(d`[Toggle]`, {
  "<CR>": () => this.myDispatch({ type: "toggle" }),
})}`;
  }
}
```

# Testing

For comprehensive testing documentation, patterns, and best practices, use `get_file` to access the `doc-testing` skill at `.claude/skills/doc-testing/skill.md`.

Quick reference:

- Run tests: `npx vitest run` (from project root)
- Run specific test: `npx vitest run <file>`
- Use `withDriver()` helper for integration tests
- Prefer realistic nvim interactions over internal API access

# Type checks

use `npx tsgo --noEmit` to run type checking, from the project root (this uses the native Go-based TypeScript compiler from `@typescript/native-preview`). Once again, I remind you, you do not need to cd into any subdirectory.

# Worktrees

This repo uses git worktrees with a bare repo layout. Sibling directories of the repo root are individual worktrees (e.g. `../main`, `../my-feature`).

To create a new worktree:

```sh
scripts/setup-worktree.sh <branch-name> [base-branch]
```

This creates the worktree as a sibling directory, sets up git hooks, and runs `npm ci`. If the branch already exists it checks it out; otherwise it creates a new branch optionally based on `[base-branch]`.

# Notes

To avoid complexity, keep variable names on the lua side camelCase, to match the variables defined in typescript.

We only want to use a single bottom value, so use undefined whenever you can and avoid null. When external libraries use null, only use null at the boundary, and convert to undefined as early as possible, so the internals of the plugin only use undefined.

You must **NEVER** introduce new `any` types. Always check with the user if you're thinking about doing so.

Commit message:

feat: add @magenta/core workspace and move edl + file-io into it
- Create node/core/ as an npm workspace with TypeScript project references
- Move edl module and capabilities/file-io into node/core/src/
- Update all consumers to import from @magenta/core
- Root tsconfig uses references + excludes node/core/
- Exclude node/core/dist from eslint
- Type-check via tsgo -b (build mode) for cross-project support

context.md, after:

# Overview

this is a neovim plugin for agentic tool use
the entrypoint is in `lua/magenta/init.lua`. When the plugin starts up, it will kick off the `node/magenta.ts` node process. That will reach back out and establish the bridge, which will grab the options from lua and establish bidirectional communication between the two halves of the plugin.

The node code is organized as npm workspaces:

- `node/core/` (`@magenta/core`) — standalone logic with no neovim dependency (tools, providers, edl, etc.)
- Root project — neovim-specific code (sidebar, tea, buffer-tracker, nvim bindings)

The root `tsconfig.json` uses TypeScript project references to enforce the boundary: core cannot import from the root project.
options are configured in `lua/magenta/options.lua`
neovim keymaps are configured in `lua/magenta/keymaps.lua`
`node/sidebar.ts` manages the sidebar. This is where we create the chat and input buffers, and initialize keymaps on them.

# Architecture

The core architectural components include:

- `Controllers` - Classes that manage specific parts of the application. Each controller maintains its own state and handles messages that are relevant to it.
- `Msg/RootMsg` - Messages that trigger state changes. There's a root message type that is then directed to specific controllers.
- `dispatch/myDispatch` - Functions passed to controllers that allows them to send messages through the system. Each controller receives a root dispatcher that it can use to communicate with other parts of the system.
- `view` - A function that renders the current controller state in TUI. This is done in a declarative way using the `d` template literal. You can attach bindings to different parts of the text via `withBindings`.

The general flow is:

- Controllers initialize with their own state and receive a root dispatcher.
- When a user action occurs, it triggers a command or binding that dispatches a message.
- The message flows to the appropriate controller via the root dispatcher.
- The controller updates its internal state and may dispatch additional messages to other controllers.
- The view is rendered based on the updated state.

One key principle: **If you create a class, you're responsible for passing actions or messages to that class.**

The main architectural files are:

- [root-msg.ts](https://github.com/dlants/magenta.nvim/blob/main/node/root-msg.ts) - Defines the root message type that flows through the system
- [magenta.ts](https://github.com/dlants/magenta.nvim/blob/main/node/magenta.ts#L21) - Contains the central dispatching loop in the `dispatch` method of the Magenta class
- [tea/tea.ts](https://github.com/dlants/magenta.nvim/blob/main/node/tea/tea.ts) - Manages the rendering cycle
- [view.ts](https://github.com/dlants/magenta.nvim/blob/main/node/tea/view.ts) - Implements the VDOM-like declarative rendering template

# View System

For comprehensive view system documentation and templating patterns, use `get_file` to access the `doc-views` skill at `.claude/skills/doc-views/skill.md`.

**Important**: This is NOT React - it's a TUI templating system for neovim buffers.

# Putting it all together

Here's a minimal example of a controller with just one message type and two states:

```typescript
// make sure to grab appropriate imports relative to the file path

// Define a simple message type for toggling
export type Msg = { type: "toggle" } | { type: "request-finished" };

// this should be imported from node/root-msg.ts
export type ToggleRootMsg = {
  type: "toggle-msg";
  id: ToggleId;
  msg: Msg;
};

export type ToggleId = number & { __toggleId: true };

export class Toggle {
  public state: {
    isOn: boolean;
  };

  private myDispatch: Dispatch<Msg>;

  constructor(
    public id: ToggleId,
    private context: { dispatch: Dispatch<RootMsg>; nvim: Nvim },
  ) {
    this.myDispatch = (msg) =>
      this.context.dispatch({
        type: "toggle-msg",
        id: this.id,
        msg,
      });

    this.state = {
      isOn: false,
    };
  }

  update(msg: RootMsg): void {
    if (msg.type === "toggle-msg" && msg.id === this.id) {
      this.myUpdate(msg.msg);
    }
  }

  private myUpdate(msg: Msg): void {
    switch (msg.type) {
      case "toggle":
        this.state.isOn = !this.state.isOn;

        if (this.state.isOn) {
          this.notifyServer().catch((error) => {
            this.context.nvim.logger.error("Failed to notify server:", error);
          });
        }
        return;
      case "request-finished":
        this.context.nvim.logger.info("Server notification completed");
        return;
      default:
        assertUnreachable(msg);
    }
  }

  private async notifyServer(): Promise<void> {
    await new Promise<void>((resolve) => {
      setTimeout(() => resolve(), 500);
    });
    // Dispatch the request-finished message when done
    this.myDispatch({ type: "request-finished" });
  }

  view() {
    return d`
Current state: ${this.state.isOn ? "ON" : "OFF"}

${withBindings(d`[Toggle]`, {
  "<CR>": () => this.myDispatch({ type: "toggle" }),
})}`;
  }
}
```

# Testing

For comprehensive testing documentation, patterns, and best practices, use `get_file` to access the `doc-testing` skill at `.claude/skills/doc-testing/skill.md`.

Quick reference:

- Run tests: `npx vitest run` (from project root)
- Run specific test: `npx vitest run <file>`
- Use `withDriver()` helper for integration tests
- Prefer realistic nvim interactions over internal API access

# Type checks

Use `npx tsgo -b` to run type checking, from the project root. This uses build mode which handles the workspace project references (building `node/core` declarations first, then checking the root project). You do not need to cd into any subdirectory.

To type-check just the core package: `npx tsgo -p node/core/tsconfig.json --noEmit`

To run just the core tests: `npx vitest run node/core/`

# Worktrees

This repo uses git worktrees with a bare repo layout. Sibling directories of the repo root are individual worktrees (e.g. `../main`, `../my-feature`).

To create a new worktree:

```sh
scripts/setup-worktree.sh <branch-name> [base-branch]
```

This creates the worktree as a sibling directory, sets up git hooks, and runs `npm ci`. If the branch already exists it checks it out; otherwise it creates a new branch optionally based on `[base-branch]`.

# Notes

To avoid complexity, keep variable names on the lua side camelCase, to match the variables defined in typescript.

We only want to use a single bottom value, so use undefined whenever you can and avoid null. When external libraries use null, only use null at the boundary, and convert to undefined as early as possible, so the internals of the plugin only use undefined.

You must **NEVER** introduce new `any` types. Always check with the user if you're thinking about doing so.
